We'll now continue our coverage
of the Java fork-join pool.
In this part of the
lesson, I'll explain
how the common
fork-join pool can
be used to help maximize
processor core utilization.
A static common pool is
available and appropriate
for most programs.
There can only be one
of these in a process.
We've talked about this
earlier in the context
of parallel streams.
And now we're going to
focus on it in the context
of the fork-join framework.
This pool is used by
any fork-join task
that's not submitted
to a specified
pool within a process.
The purpose for doing this
single common fork-join pool
is to help optimize
research utilization
since this common pool
is aware of all the cores
and how they're being used
globally within a process.
The goal, as we've
mentioned before,
is to try to maximize processor
core utilization by employing
the work stealing model.
I've also mentioned before
that this global versus local
resource management trade off
is very common in computing,
with things like the
Java global heap used
to try to manage memory
in a centralized way
to give better perspectives on
how memory is being allocated
and how to reclaim
it effectively.
This pool is used by the Java
parallel streams framework,
as we talked about before.
But we'll cover a broader
range of use cases now.
By default, the
common fork-join pool
has one less thread
than the number
of cores that are known to the
Java execution environment.
So for example, if we had
a quad core processor,
then parallelism, this field
that we're setting here,
would be equal to 3.
If you call the ForkJoinPool.get
CommonPoolParallelism method,
it'll return the number
of cores minus one.
Again, assuming
we had four cores,
this would return three
on a quad core processor.
The reason that
it's done this way
is because the invoking
thread is temporarily
included as part of the pool.
That invoking thread could
be the main user interface
thread, for example.
Or it could be some
other thread that
starts the wheels in motion.
So as a result, the actual
use of fork-join pool
in practice, the
common fork-join pool,
will end up being the number
of processor cores known
to the job execution
environment.
It's also worth noting
that if you create
your own fork-join pool,
and you give it a value,
or if you create a
default fork-join
pool other than the common
fork-join pool, that
will be set to the number of
cores known to the underlying
Java execution
environment, as opposed
to the fork-join pool,
which is one less than that.
There are cases, however,
where the default
number of threads in the
common fork-join pool
may be inadequate.
And this typically arises,
this problem arises,
if you have blocking operations.
For example, if
you have something
like our image
stream gang program
that we talked
about before, where
you're downloading images and
processing them and so on.
In that particular case where
the operations may block,
you probably want to have
more than the default
number of cores
in order to ensure
you get proper utilization
of the underlying hardware
resources.
There are some other
subtle problems
that can arise if you only
have a fixed number of course
regarding deadlock.
But I won't talk about
that at this point.
So as a result of these issues,
the Java fork-join framework
makes it possible to
expand and contract
the common fork-join
pool programmatically.
And there's a couple of
different ways to do this.
One way is by modifying
a system property.
So you can see here that you can
modify this rather long-winded
system property called
java.util.concur
rent.ForkJoinPool.parallelism.
And you can set that to the
desired number of threads.
But there's a couple
of tricky points here.
First, it's kind of hard to
know how many threads to set
in the common fork-join pool.
Moreover, modifying
this process will
affect all the usage of
the common fork-join pool
in a process.
It's something that has a global
effect within that process.
So it's got a ripple impact.
Moreover, and this is actually
a somewhat bizarre problem,
this property can
only be changed
before the common fork-join
pool is initially created.
And that occurs the first time
a fork-join pool is created.
The way it works under the hood,
if you look at the source code,
is it's initialized on demand
the first time it's used.
And after it's initialized,
you can't reset this property.
It will have no effect
you can reset it.
But it will have no effect.
Therefore, we need another more
flexible, more dynamic approach
to increase the fork-join
pool size automatically.
And the way that that works
in the common fork-join pool
is by using a mechanism
known as the managed blocker.
The managed blocker
is an interface
and an API that's exposed
via a static method
on the common
fork-join pool that
allows the common
fork-join pool to add
worker threads temporarily as
needed as things may block.
And it's particularly
useful when
a task will block on I/O, for
example, downloading an image
or writing to a file, writing
a large file out to disk
or out to flash
memory or whatnot,
or if you're going to be
blocking on synchronizers
or blocking on blocking
cues, lots of situations
where you might block.
So if you're going to block,
then using a managed blocker
is important.
Because it helps
tell the underlying
common fork-join pool to
expand the number of threads
so that other threads
are available to run
while a given thread blocks, or
a set of given threads block.
Managed blockers
can only be used
with the common fork-join pool.
You can't use them with
just a regular, user-created
fork-join pool.
It also turns out to be
very helpful to encapsulate
the managed blocker mechanism
within some kind of wrapper
class.
And when we talk about
how to apply the managed
blocker interface
a little bit later,
I'll show you an example of
a very cool wrapper called
blocking task, which makes
it a lot easier to program
with this mechanism.
As threads are created, if
they're not used continuously,
then after some
period of non-use
the fork-join pool can
reclaim these threads
and terminate them
so that they're not
taking up system resources.
So this is a nice
adaptive model,
not unlike the cached
thread pool mechanisms
we talked about in our course
on concurrent object-oriented
programming in the section
on the executor framework.
So it's sort of the same idea.
But of course, you have
less control over it.
Because the fork-join pool
gives you little or no knobs
to control these things, whereas
with the cache thread pool,
there are knobs you
can change to determine
how long idle threads
remain active before they're
terminated.
Fork-join pool takes
matters into its own hands
and makes these
decisions on your behalf.